Adding 00-reference to build azimuth kidney reference (#706)
AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis: analyses/cell-type-wilms-tumor-06/00_fetal_reference_kidney.Rmd

---
title: "Build azimuth compatible fetal kidney reference from the kidney cell atlas"
author: "Maud PLASCHKA"

> date: '2024-08-07'
> output: 
>   html_document: 
>     toc: yes
>     toc_float: yes
>     code_folding: hide
>     highlight: pygments
>     df_print: paged

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: '2024-08-07'
params:
  ref_url: "https://datasets.cellxgene.cziscience.com/40ebb8e4-1a25-4a33-b8ff-02d1156e4e9b.rds"
  padj_threshold: 0.05
  lfc_threshold: 1
  rate1_threshold: 0.5
  seed: 12345
output: 
  html_document: 
    toc: yes
    toc_float: yes
    code_folding: hide
    highlight: pygments
    df_print: paged
```

Author: Oh I see now :) thanks!

---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE,
                      message=FALSE,
                      warnings=FALSE)
```

Introduction

The aim is to build an azimuth compatible reference for fetal kidney from the kidney cell atlas.
The rds data can be download using the download link https://datasets.cellxgene.cziscience.com/40ebb8e4-1a25-4a33-b8ff-02d1156e4e9b.rds

## Packages

Load required packages in the following chunk, if needed.
Do not install packages here; only load them with the `library()` function.

```{r packages, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
library("Seurat")
library(sctransform)
library(Azimuth)
library(SCpubr)
library(tidyverse)
library(patchwork)

> library(SeuratWrappers)

Reviewer: I was poking around locally to see if I could better understand the Azimuth problem, and I think we need to get `SeuratWrappers` into the `renv.lock` file.

I was able to install from RStudio within the Docker container with:

```
remotes::install_github("satijalab/seurat-wrappers@8d46d6c47c089e193fe5c02a8c23970715918aa9")
```

(This is the most recent commit.)

If you run `renv::snapshot()`, I expect some packages might get removed because the code in this branch doesn't account for what is getting added in #704. That would be okay, though; we'd need to resolve it in whichever branch gets merged second.

```

## Base directories

```{r base paths, eval=TRUE, include=TRUE}
# The base path for the OpenScPCA repository, found by its (hidden) .git directory
repository_base <- rprojroot::find_root(rprojroot::is_git_root)

# The current data directory, found within the repository base directory

> data_dir <- file.path(repository_base, "data", "2024-07-08", "SCPCP000006")

Reviewer: We always want to point to `data/current/SCPCP000006` so we can re-run this notebook without code changes.

```suggestion
data_dir <- file.path(repository_base, "data", "current", "SCPCP000006")
```

# The path to this module
module_base <- file.path(repository_base, "analyses", "cell-type-wilms-tumor-06")
```

## Input files

rds data can be downloaded using the URLhttps://datasets.cellxgene.cziscience.com/40ebb8e4-1a25-4a33-b8ff-02d1156e4e9b.rds

Please note that this download link permanently references the current version of the dataset (08/2024). 

> If this dataset is updated, a new download link will be created that permanently references the next version of this dataset.

Reviewer: You would need to change this text if using `params`.

> We save it in the marker-sets folder of the module.
> Note to the DataLab: should we save it somewhere else? 
> I suggest this rds file could be placed here transiently and removed once the reference is build?
> 
> 
> ```{r path_to_data}
> path_to_data <- file.path(module_base, "marker-sets/fetal_full.rds")

Reviewer: For transient files, you can [put them in `scratch`](https://openscpca.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contributing-to-analyses/analysis-modules/#skeleton-analysis-module-contents).

```suggestion
We place it in the `scratch` folder of the module because it is a temporary file.

```{r path_to_data}
path_to_data <- file.path(module_base, "scratch", fetal_full.rds")
```

Files in `scratch` are ignored, which is what we want here!

url = "https://datasets.cellxgene.cziscience.com/40ebb8e4-1a25-4a33-b8ff-02d1156e4e9b.rds"

> download.file(url, path_to_data)

Reviewer: I think we could move this URL to a parameter with this as the default. I'll comment above with that suggestion.

```
## Output file

> The azimuth compatible fetal kidney reference will be saved in the marker-sets folder from the module.

Reviewer: Update this text to reflect whatever happens in the chunk below!

```{r path_to_output}

> path_to_output <- file.path(module_base, "marker-sets")

Reviewer: Given what I expect the size to be like, you probably want to put this in `results` and then sync to your bucket:

```suggestion
path_to_output <- file.path(module_base, "results", "references")
```

Reviewer: I did check your results bucket, so I see the resulting files 👍🏻 

Did you need to move them to `results` manually? I think what I am proposing cuts out that step (if my assumption is correct, of course!)

Author: yes you are right, makes sense! I'll correct this!

```

## Some config set-up / threshold

We store in a config list names "cfg" parameters used all along the analysis to filter for p-value, log fold change, percentage of expression, etc.

```{r cfg}

> cfg = list()
> cfg$padj_thershold = 0.05
> cfg$lfc_threshold = 1
> cfg$rate1_threshold = 0.5
> 
> 
> set.seed(12345)

Reviewer: These can also be moved to `params` and then you could do the following:

```suggestion
cfg <- list()
cfg$padj_threshold <- params$padj_threshold
cfg$lfc_threshold <- params$lfc_threshold
cfg$rate1_threshold <- params$rate1_threshold

set.seed(params$seed)
```

Author: not sure if I understand what this params is... Is that for later run of the all scripts in the modules in a .sh or .py execution file?

Reviewer: The `params` set in the YAML header (https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/pull/706#discussion_r1711490706) can be referenced this way – `params` becomes a list.

```

# Create a azimuth compatible reference

```{r pre_process, echo=TRUE, fig.height=7, fig.width=12, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, out.width='100%'}
seurat <- readRDS(path_to_data)

d2 <- do_DimPlot(seurat, reduction = "umap", dims = c(1,2), group.by = "compartment", label = TRUE, repel = TRUE) + NoLegend() + ggtitle("umap reduction before SCTransform")
d3 <- do_DimPlot(seurat, reduction = "umap", dims = c(1,2), group.by = "cell_type", label = TRUE, repel = TRUE) + NoLegend()

d2 | d3

options(future.globals.maxSize= 891289600000)
s <- SCTransform(seurat, verbose = FALSE, method = "glmGamPoi", conserve.memory = TRUE)
s <- RunPCA(s, npcs = 50, verbose = FALSE)
s <- RunUMAP(s, dims = 1:50, verbose = FALSE, return.model = TRUE)
```

```{r create_ref, echo=TRUE, fig.height=7, fig.width=12, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, out.width='100%'}
options(future.globals.maxSize= 891289600000)

> Fetal_kidney <- AzimuthReference(

Reviewer: I am wondering if you have had any luck running `AzimuthReference` within a script? 🤔 Because if so, maybe we make this a script instead of a notebook.

Reviewer: I know very little about Azimuth, so forgive me if this is a naive question! How is the reference generated here different from what is available on Zenodo? https://zenodo.org/records/4738021#.YJIW4C2ZNQI

Author: I tried to run the same in a script instead of a RMarkdown but same, I couldn't run it using one clic on "Source". 🤔

Reviewer: I am new to this, but I am now under the impression we can use Seurat to accomplish many of the same things as Azimuth: https://azimuth.hubmapconsortium.org/#General

>#### Can I run the app myself?
> The source code is available [here](https://github.com/satijalab/azimuth). However, for users interested in performing these analyses outside the context of the Azimuth app, we suggest using Seurat v4 and using our vignette on [Mapping and annotating query datasets](https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/integration_mapping.html) as an example. You can also download a Seurat v4 R script from the app once your analysis is complete to reproduce the results locally.

(h/t @jashapiro)

Following those links, I assume we'd want to use this section as a reference: https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/integration_mapping.html#cell-type-classification-using-an-integrated-reference

Being unable to run this successfully except for chunk by chunk gives me pause – it would be hard to test this notebook in GitHub Actions.

Author: The reference you suggest can also be of interest but it contains 15 different organs fron a quick look. The one I wanted to use is only composed of cells from the kidney and from what I understood the annotation have been done by kidney experts.
But I could give a try with the one you suggest, might be more straightforward!
I'll compare the two on few samples.

Reviewer: > But I could give a try with the one you suggest, might be more straightforward! I'll compare the two on few samples.

I would be very curious about this result in general! 

Another option would be to try to use Seurat https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/pull/706#discussion_r1712065012 with the kidney dataset.

I am trying to avoid the `AzimuthReference()` bug if at all possible 😄

Author: Thank you very much for looking into Seurat/Azimuth! 
The label transfer using FindTransferAnchors and TransferData (described in the link you suggested https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/integration_mapping.html#cell-type-classification-using-an-integrated-reference) is what I used before Seurat and Azimuth v5! I'll go back to it!

and tool described here: https://github.com/cancerbits/DElegate 

### Find marker genes for each of the compartment

```{r markers_compatment, fig.width=8, fig.height=7, out.width='100%'}
de_results   <- DElegate::FindAllMarkers2(s, group_column = "compartment")

#filter the most relevant markers
s.markers <- de_results[de_results$padj < cfg$padj_thershold & de_results$log_fc > cfg$lfc_threshold & de_results$rate1 > cfg$rate1_threshold,]

DT::datatable(s.markers, caption = ("marker genes"), 
              extensions = 'Buttons', 
              options = list(  dom = 'Bfrtip',

                               buttons = c( 'csv', 'excel')))

# Select top 5 genes for heatmap plotting
s.markers <- na.omit(s.markers)
s.markers %>%
    group_by(group1) %>%
    top_n(n =  5, wt = log_fc) -> top5

# subset for plotting
Idents(s) <- s$compartment
cells <- WhichCells(s, downsample = 100)
ss <- subset(s, cells = cells)
ss <- ScaleData(ss, features = top5$feature)

p1 <- SCpubr::do_DimPlot(s, reduction="umap", group.by = "compartment", label = TRUE, repel = TRUE) + ggtitle("compartment")
p2 <- DoHeatmap(ss, features = top5$feature,  cells = cells, group.by = "compartment") + NoLegend() + 

>   scale_fill_gradientn(colors =  c("#01665e","#35978f",'darkslategray3', "#f7f7f7", "#fee391","#fec44f","#F9AD03")) 

Reviewer: I think this is the same color palette as what is used below? So I'd recommend saving it as a variable so you only would need to change it one place:

```r
heatmap_color_palette <- c("#01665e","#35978f",'darkslategray3', "#f7f7f7", "#fee391","#fec44f","#F9AD03")
```
